Array feature specification (#283)
oauth-wg/oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt: draft-ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt.md

variety of applications. SD-JWT is a selective disclosure mechanism for JWT and is
similarly intended to be general-purpose specification.

> While JWTs for claims describing natural persons are a common use case, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While JWTs with claims describing natural persons are a common use case, the
```

## Feature Summary

* This specification defines

>   - a format for an Issuer-signed JWT containing selectively disclosable claims (including selectively disclosable object properties and array elements, as well as nested data structures built from these),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - a format for an Issuer-signed JWT containing selectively disclosable claims that include object properties (key-value pairs), array elements, and nested data structures built from these),
```

Author: ```suggestion
 - a format for an Issuer-signed JWT containing selectively disclosable claims that include object properties (key-value pairs), array elements, and nested data structures built from these,
```
Remove extra paranthesis.

  that supports selective disclosure as defined in this document and can contain both regular claims and digests of selectively-disclosable claims.

Disclosure:

> :  A combination of a salt, a cleartext claim name (in case the claim is a key-value pair and not an array element), and a cleartext claim value, all of which are used to calculate a digest for the respective claim.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:  A combination of a salt, a cleartext claim name (present when the claim is a key-value pair and absent when the claim is an array element), and a cleartext claim value, all of which are used to calculate a digest for the respective claim.
```

  that supports selective disclosure as defined in this document and can contain both regular claims and digests of selectively-disclosable claims.

Disclosure:

> :  A combination of a salt, an optional cleartext claim name, and a cleartext claim value, all of which are used to calculate a digest for the respective claim.

Author: ```suggestion
:  A combination of a salt, a cleartext claim name (in case the claim is a key/value pair and not an array element), and a cleartext claim value, all of which are used to calculate a digest for the respective claim.
```

This section defines data formats for SD-JWTs, Disclosures, Holder Binding JWTs and formats for combining these elements for transport.

## Format of an SD-JWT {#creating_sd_jwt}

An SD-JWT is a JWT that MUST be signed using the Issuer's private key.
It MUST use a JWS asymmetric digital signature algorithm. It
MUST NOT use `none` or an identifier for a symmetric algorithm (MAC).

> The payload of an SD-JWT is an object according to the following rules:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The payload of an SD-JWT is a JSON object according to the following rules:
```

I know it's implied and maybe even obvious but I still think explicitly saying "JSON object" here is worthwhile.

>  1. The payload MAY contain the `_sd_alg` key described in (#hash_function_claim).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 1. The payload MAY contain the hash algorithm used by the Issuer to generate the digests as described in (#hash_function_claim).
```
because points 2 and 3 do not mention `_sd` and `...` (which I think is correct), for consistency, suggest not to mention `_sd_alg` too. otherwise my brain went like "why is `_sd` not metioned!"

Author: I don't think that this is needed. `_sd_alg` is very concise and concrete, so we should mention it. For `...` and `_sd` we say how exactly they are embedded further below (because it needs much more explanation than `_sd_alg`).

Bonus nitpick: The payload doesn't contain the hash algorith, but the hash algorithm's identifier.

Reviewer: ok, that's fine.

 2. The payload MAY contain one or more digests of Disclosures to enable selective disclosure of the respective claims, created and formatted as described below.

>  3. The payload MAY contain one or more decoy digests to hide the number of claims in the SD-JWT, created and formatted as described in {#decoy_digests}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 3. The payload MAY contain one or more decoy digests to hide the number of claims in the SD-JWT, created and formatted as described in (#decoy_digests).
```

The resulting Disclosure would be: `WyJfMjZiYzRMVC1hYzZxMktJNmNCVzVlcyIsICJmYW1pbHlfbmFtZSIsICJNw7ZiaXVzIl0`

Note that the JSON encoding of the object is not canonicalized, so variations in
white space, encoding of Unicode characters, and ordering of object properties
are allowed. For example, the following strings are all valid and encode the
same claim value:

 * A different way to encode the umlaut (two dots `¨` placed over the letter): `WyJfMjZiYzRMVC1hYzZxMktJNmNCVzVlcyIsICJmYW1pbHlfbmFtZSIsICJNXHUwMGY2Yml1cyJd`
 * No white space: `WyJfMjZiYzRMVC1hYzZxMktJNmNCVzVlcyIsImZhbWlseV9uYW1lIiwiTcO2Yml1cyJd`
 * Newline characters between elements: `WwoiXzI2YmM0TFQtYWM2cTJLSTZjQlc1ZXMiLAoiZmFtaWx5X25hbWUiLAoiTcO2Yml1cyIKXQ`

See (#disclosure_format_considerations) for some further considerations on the Disclosure format approach.

### Disclosures for Array Elements {#disclosures_for_array_elements}

> For each claim that is an array element and that is to be made selectively disclosable, the Issuer MUST create a Disclosure as described above, with the following difference:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each claim that is an array element and that is to be made selectively disclosable, the Issuer MUST create a Disclosure as follows:
```

 * The array MUST contain two elements in this order:
   1. The salt value as described in (#disclosures_for_object_properties).
   2. The array element that is to be hidden. This value MAY be of any type that is allowed in JSON, including numbers, strings, booleans, arrays, and objects.

> From the array, the Disclosure string is created as described in
> (#disclosures_for_object_properties). The same considerations regarding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Disclosure string is created by JSON-encoding this array and base64url-encoding the byte representation of the resulting string as described in (#disclosures_for_object_properties). The same considerations regarding
```

variations in the result of the JSON encoding apply.

For example, a Disclosure for the second element of the `nationalities` array in the following claim set:

```json
{
  "nationalities": ["DE", "FR"]
}
```

> could be created as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
could be created by first creating the following array:
```

For embedding the Disclosures in the SD-JWT, the Disclosures are hashed using the hash algorithm specified in the `_sd_alg` claim described in (#hash_function_claim). The resulting digest is then included in the SD-JWT instead of the original claim value, as described next.

The digest MUST be taken over the US-ASCII bytes of the base64url-encoded Disclosure. This follows the convention in JWS [@!RFC7515] and JWE [@RFC7516]. The bytes of the digest MUST then be base64url-encoded.

It is important to note that:

 * The input to the hash function MUST be the base64url-encoded Disclosure, not the bytes encoded by the base64url string.
 * The bytes of the output of the hash function MUST be base64url-encoded, and are not the bytes making up the (often used) hex representation of the bytes of the digest.

For example, the SHA-256 digest of the Disclosure
`WyI2cU1RdlJMNWhhaiIsICJmYW1pbHlfbmFtZSIsICJNw7ZiaXVzIl0` would be
`uutlBuYeMDyjLLTpf6Jxi7yNkEF35jdyWMn9U7b_RYY`.

The SHA-256 digest of the Disclosure
`WyJsa2x4RjVqTVlsR1RQVW92TU5JdkNBIiwgIkZSIl0` would be
`w0I8EKcdCtUPkGCNUrfwVp2xEgNjtoIDlOxc9-PlOhs`.

## Embedding Disclosure Digests in SD-JWTs {#embedding_disclosure_digests}

> Digests of disclosures are embedded into the SD-JWT instead of the original
> claims. The precise way of embedding the digests depends on the type of the
> claim, as described in the following sections.

Author: ```suggestion
For selectively disclosable claims, the digests of the Disclosures are embedded into the SD-JWT instead of the claims themselves. The precise way of embedding depends on whether a claim is an object property (key-value pair) or an array element.

 * For a claim that is an object property, the Issuer embeds a Disclosure as described in (#embedding_object_properties).
* For a claim that is an array element, the Issuer creates a Disclosure as described in (#embedding_array_elements).
```

> ### Object Properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Object Properties {#embedding_object_properties}
```

Digests of Disclosures for object properties are added to an array under the new
key `_sd` in the object. The `_sd` key MUST refer to an array of strings, each
string being a digest of a Disclosure or a decoy digest as described in (#decoy_digests).

The array MAY be empty in case the Issuer decided not to selectively disclose
any of the claims at that level. However, it is RECOMMENDED to omit the `_sd`
key in this case to save space.

The Issuer MUST hide the original order of the claims in the array. To ensure
this, it is RECOMMENDED to shuffle the array of hashes (after potentially adding
decoy digests as described in (#decoy_digests)), e.g., by sorting it
alphanumerically or randomly. The precise method does not matter as long as it
does not depend on the original order of elements.

For example, using the digest of the object property Disclosure created above,
the Issuer could create the following SD-JWT payload to make `family_name`
selectively disclosable:

```json
{
  "given_name": "Alice",
  "_sd": ["uutlBuYeMDyjLLTpf6Jxi7yNkEF35jdyWMn9U7b_RYY"]
}
```

> ### Array Elements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Array Elements {#embedding_array_elements}
```

Digests of Disclosures for array elements are added to the array in the same
position as the original claim value in the array. For each digest, an object

> of the form `{"...": "<digest>"}` is added to the array. The key MUST be the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the form `{"...": "<digest>"}` is added to the array. The key MUST always be the
```

> string `...` (three dots). The value MUST be the digest of the Disclosure as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
string `...` (three dots). The value MUST be the digest of the Disclosure created as
```

described in (#hashing_disclosures). There MUST NOT be any other keys in the
object.

For example, using the digest of the array element Disclosure created above,
the Issuer could create the following SD-JWT payload to make the second element
of the `nationalities` array selectively disclosable:

```json
{
  "nationalities":
    ["DE", {"...": "w0I8EKcdCtUPkGCNUrfwVp2xEgNjtoIDlOxc9-PlOhs"}]
}
```

> As described in (#verifier_verification), Verifiers ignore all selectively

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described in (#verifier_verification), Verifiers MUST ignore all selectively
```

Author: This here is intentionally not a normative requirement. We don't need to state the same "MUST" twice.

Reviewer: that's fine.

disclosable array elements for which they did not receive a Disclosure. In the
example above, the verification process would output an array with only one
element unless a matching Disclosure for the second element is received.

> ## Example 1: SD-JWT {#example-1}

Reviewer: I don't disagree this section probably belongs here in terms of the order, but the level of this section feels off (looked at [the rendered ver of this branch](https://drafts.oauth.net/oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt/danielfett/arrays/draft-ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt.html#name-format-of-an-sd-jwt)).

I think there is a logical separations between sections from 5.1 to 5.5 (basic operations) and from sections 5.6 to 5.7 (advanced concepts) from 5.8 to 5.9 (content of the SD-JWT) and 5.10 to 5.11 (combined formats). and having them all at the same level makes it hard to read..

Author: Yes, I agree! There will be other changes coming that may prompt a slight restructuring of existing sections. Let's revisit after those changes. I created Issue #290 for this.

This example uses the following object as the set of claims that the Issuer is issuing:

<{{examples/simple/user_claims.json}}

The following non-normative example shows a payload of an SD-JWT for this End-User data:

<{{examples/simple/sd_jwt_payload.json}}

The Issuer in this case made the following decisions:

* The `nationalities` array is always visible, but its contents are selectively disclosable.
* The `sub` element and essential verification data (`iss`, `iat`, `cnf`, etc.) are always visible.
* All other End-User claims are selectively disclosable.
* For `address`, the Issuer is using a flat structure, i.e., all of the claims
  in the `address` claim can only be disclosed in full. Other options are
  discussed in (#nested_data).

The Issuer creates the following Disclosures:

{{examples/simple/disclosures.md}}

The SD-JWT is then signed by the Issuer to create a JWT like the following:

<{{examples/simple/sd_jwt_serialized.txt}}

> ## Decoy Digests {#decoy_digests}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Adding Decoy Digests {#decoy_digests}
```

Author: Since this explains decoy digests (and not only how to add them), I'd like to keep the title as is.

Reviewer: ok

An Issuer MAY add additional digests to the SD-JWT that are not associated with
any claim.  The purpose of such "decoy" digests is to make it more difficult for
an attacker to see the original number of claims contained in the SD-JWT. Decoy
digests MAY be added both to the `_sd` array for objects as well as in arrays.

It is RECOMMENDED to create the decoy digests by hashing over a
cryptographically secure random number. The bytes of the digest MUST then be
base64url-encoded as above. The same digest function as for the Disclosures MUST
be used.

For decoy digests, no Disclosure is sent to the Holder, i.e., the Holder will
see digests that do not correspond to any Disclosure. See
(#decoy_digests_privacy) for additional privacy considerations.

To ensure readability and replicability, the examples in this specification do

> not contain decoy digests unless explicitly stated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not contain decoy digests unless explicitly stated. For an example
with decoy digests, see (#example-simple_structured).
```

> ## Note on Nested Data in SD-JWTs {#nested_data}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Nested Data in SD-JWTs {#nested_data}
```
It is not a note if there are three examples explaining the concept

Being JSON, an object in an SD-JWT payload MAY contain key-value pairs where the value is another object or objects MAY be elements in arrays. In SD-JWT, the Issuer decides for each claim individually, on each level of the JSON, whether the claim should be selectively disclosable or not. This choice can be made on each level independent from whether keys higher in the hierarchy are selectively disclosable.

From this it follows that the `_sd` key containing digests MAY appear multiple
times in an SD-JWT, and likewise, there MAY be multiple arrays within the
hierarchy with each having selectively disclosable elements. Digests of
selectively disclosable claims MAY even appear within other Disclosures.

> The following examples illustrate some of the options an Issuer has. It is up to the Issuer to decide which option to use, depending on, for example, the expected use cases for the SD-JWT, requirements for privacy, size considerations, or ecosystem requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following examples illustrate some of the options an Issuer has. It is up to the Issuer to decide which option to use, depending on, for example, the expected use cases for the SD-JWT, requirements for privacy, size considerations, or ecosystem requirements. For full examples with nested structures, see (#example-simple_structured) and (#example-complex-structured-sd-jwt).
```

I am a little confused why we need (#example-complex-structured-sd-jwt) if we have these 3 options. or I am a little confused why we need these three options if we have (#example-complex-structured-sd-jwt). but guess both are useful..

Author: The purpose of (#example-complex-structured-sd-jwt) alias `examples/complex_ekyc/user_claims.json` is to show *really* deeply nested objects. This section here shows a relatively simple structure to explain the basics.

{{examples/address_only_recursive/disclosures.md}}

## Hash Function Claim {#hash_function_claim}

> The claim `_sd_alg` indicates the hash algorithm used by the Issuer to generate
> the digests over the salts and the claim values. If the  `_sd_alg` claim is not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The claim `_sd_alg` indicates the hash algorithm used by the Issuer to generate
the digests as described in (#creating_disclosures). If the  `_sd_alg` claim is not
```
to avoid saying when the hashed array contains a claim name and when it does not

the Issuer MAY create the key pair for the Holder, or
Holder and Issuer MAY use pre-established key material.

> Note: Examples in this document use `cnf` Claim defined in [@RFC7800] to include

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: Examples in this document use the `cnf` Claim defined in [@RFC7800] to include
```

> Note: Examples in this document use `cnf` Claim defined in [@RFC7800] to include
> raw public key by value in SD-JWT.

Author: ```suggestion
Note: Examples in this document use the `cnf` Claim defined in [@RFC7800] to include
the raw public key by value in SD-JWT.
```

 1. Separate the SD-JWT and the Disclosures in the Combined Format for Issuance.
 2. Hash all of the Disclosures separately.
 3. Find the objects and array elements in the SD-JWT where the digests of the

>     Disclosures are included and decode the respective plaintext values from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Disclosures are included by looking for `_sd` and `...` keys. Decode the respective plaintext values from the
```

    3. Validate the Issuer of the SD-JWT and that the signing key belongs to this Issuer.
    4. Check that the SD-JWT is valid using `nbf`, `iat`, and `exp` claims, if provided in the SD-JWT, and not selectively disclosed.
    5. Check that the `_sd_alg` claim value is understood and the hash algorithm is deemed secure.
 4. Process the Disclosures and embedded digests in the SD-JWT as follows:
    1. For each Disclosure provided:
       1. Calculate the digest over the base64url-encoded string as described in (#hashing_disclosures).
    2. (*) Identify all embedded digests in the SD-JWT as follows:

>        1. Find all objects having an `_sd` key that refers to an array.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       1. Find all objects having an `_sd` key that refers to an array of strings.
```

 4. Process the Disclosures and embedded digests in the SD-JWT as follows:
    1. For each Disclosure provided:
       1. Calculate the digest over the base64url-encoded string as described in (#hashing_disclosures).
    2. (*) Identify all embedded digests in the SD-JWT as follows:
       1. Find all objects having an `_sd` key that refers to an array of strings.
       2. Find all array elements that are objects with one key, that key being `...` and referring to a string.
    3. (**) For each embedded digest found in the previous step:
       1. Compare the value with the digests calculated previously and find the matching Disclosure. If no such Disclosure can be found, the digest MUST be ignored.
       2. If the digest was found in an object's `_sd` key:
          1. If the respective Disclosure is not a JSON-encoded array of three elements, the Verifier MUST reject the Presentation.
          2. Insert, at the level of the `_sd` key, a new claim using the claim name and claim value from the Disclosure.
          3. If the claim name already exists at the same level, the Verifier MUST reject the Presentation.

>           4. Recursively process the value using the steps described in (*) and (**).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          4. If the value still has embedded digests, recursively process the value using the steps described in (*) and (**).
```

Author: I don't think we need to say that here. The abort condition is in (*) and (**). If we say this here, developers may be tempted to implement another check searching for embedded digests.

Reviewer: that makes sense.

>        3. If the digest was found in an array element:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       3. If the digest was found in an array element using `"..."` key:
```

Author: How else would a digest be found in an array element?

Reviewer: ok, i'll think about that

          1. If the respective Disclosure is not a JSON-encoded array of two elements, the Verifier MUST reject the Presentation.
          2. Replace the array element with the claim value from the Disclosure.

>           3. Recursively process the value using the steps described in (*) and (**).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          3. If the value still has embedded digests, recursively process the value using the steps described in (*) and (**).
```

Reviewer: makes sense
